The Joe Rogan experience. I want to ask you about Lyme disease. Sure.
Lyme disease is a scary one, right? And, uh, I mean,
so many of my friends in the east coast habit,
it's really terrifying that that th that part of the country in particular seems
to be like really badly infected with these,
these ticks that carry this disease.
What can people do to prevent that? And what, what can we,
there's no vaccine for Lyme disease. And I know there was at one point in time,
but people were having an issue with, uh, I mean, uh, a good friend of mine.
Her dad actually got Lyme disease from the vaccine
before they discontinued it. Um, what can someone do to sort of, uh,
PR protect themselves? Yeah.
Well, Lyme disease in of itself is a fascinating story.
I've actually been involved with it since its early discovery in the 1980s and
Minnesota, Wisconsin was a big focus, the upper Midwest.
And this is a story that I think you'll find interesting is is that even though
it was discovered primarily in the Eastern part of the United States named after
Lyme Connecticut, um,
it's a disease that actually probably originated in the upper Midwest.
And I tell you that because, uh,
it turns out that there is a focus in Northern Wisconsin and in east central
Minnesota where there's Lyme disease.
There's another disease called anaplasmosis. There's another disease,
but easier, et cetera,
that all seemed to have a similar kind of tick human Deere
kind of component. And back in the, uh,
CCC days of the 1930s,
the white tail deer population had been virtually totally depopulated from the
Northeast.
And so they actually trapped here in Northern Wisconsin and took them out
and deposit them in the New York and Connecticut and so forth.
And most of those deer are actually deer that, you know, today there are great,
great, great, great. Great-grandfather came from Wisconsin. Wow. And guess what,
when you moved here, you moved ticks. In fact,
I was involved with a study that the Wisconsin division of health did and a
colleague of mine. The late Jeff Davis were up in Northern Wisconsin.
There's deer would come into the check station and they would actually measure
the number of ticks that were attached to the NAPE of the neck. Okay.
And they had a thing drawn and they asked hunters who were driving back to
Madison and Milwaukee.
If they would be willing to check in at a station down there for just a second.
And then they were going to count the ticks again.
And it turned out that as the vehicles come rolling down
from highway 51 from Northern Wisconsin, get on the interstate 90,
94 and go to Milwaukee or Madison,
the ticks just kept falling off until the time they get to Madison or Milwaukee,
the ticks are almost all gone well guess lo and behold,
where all the Lyme disease and so forth started to show up right along the
interstate quarter. Wow.
Because the ticks were coming off and then they were getting into the local deer
in that population. And so it's exactly what you said. The ticks are moving.
They're moving. Okay. They've moved and they're now infected. So I think that,
that this Lyme disease issue is a key one.
Lyme disease is really an important disease. It's real, no question about it.
The challenge we have is,
is that there's a lot of people that assume that they have chronic Lyme
infection and you know, the data on that is just really,
really not there to support that these people are chronically infected,
but they do have an immune response likely that occurs where it sets
up this trigger. And so they're sick. They actually have something,
but it's not treating it again for the bacteria infection.
It's the fact that this body, your own body's immune systems,
we've talked about several times today, but starts attacking you. See,
I think it's a similar picture we see with chronic fatigue syndrome,
same kind of thing. These people really are sick. They really do have problems,
but it's not something you can treat. So when people,
I have a challenge because when people take IV antibiotics at extended periods
of time for Lyme disease, you know, the data, there's four different studies.
Now that have been done where people have had what we call a double blind
control, placebo controlled trial,
where half got the drug half got Ivy, but no drug.
And it turned out all four of these studies in Lyme disease.
The people who got the,
just the placebo did just the same as the people who got the drug.
And I worry that we're using antibiotics a lot there.
And this is where I just mentioned earlier about Clostridium difficile.
We actually had a patient Minnesota died from the Ivy treatment for what was
chronic Lyme disease. And it wouldn't have been helpful.
And so we need a lot more research in this area to figure out what are these
people getting?
What is it that we can shut off so that they don't have this chronic Lyme
disease picture, knowing that it's not actually just,
you had to treat a more treatments that can help them with the antibiotics
anymore. And so I think that that's, uh, an area that, uh, uh,
we just need a lot more work in and, and as the numbers are growing,
as you know, so we don't, we don't know what's happening well, there's,
we have enough data to say your immune system is really cranked up, right?
Your immune system is, you know, just playing something. Yeah.
It's like rheumatoid arthritis, a lot of things where we, you know, we,
you know,
thank God for our immune system is what fights off all the bad things we have.
But sometimes that immune system gets turned down too much and then it takes on
us. Okay. And that goes back to the coronavirus.
So that's why a lot of these people are dying right now is this over vigorous
immune response and Lyme disease has kind of that insane inciting event where we
have evidence now that you could be infected with the bacteria.
But if we treat you, it's not like it's like every other bacteria,
you can really get rid of it,
but you still have this chronic illness that's occurring.
And what I think is hard is,
is that we see people who have this,
who are desperate to have somebody understand what they have.
And they end up going to people who take real advantage of clinicians who charge
them an arm and a leg for things that are not going to help them.
And what we need is a lot more research on what is actually going on and what
kind of drugs can we use to reverse this immune system disorder. Right.
We have, uh, a friend of mine, who's a UFC fighter, Jim Miller, and he's,
he's got Lyme disease and it's pretty bad. And he takes a stack of pills.
I don't know what he takes every day. Yeah.
What do you think someone is taking and w what,
what benefit would they get from that?
I couldn't tell. I mean, I'm, I'm not, you know, without knowing what it Sarah,
but again, more often than not a few has been adequately treated. Um,
it's not that the bacteria is still growing in him.
Like it might be for a lot of days, but an auto-immune auto-immune,
which is real. I mean, that's,
the other thing is I think these people just want to be legitimized and said,
you know, I'm really sick and I'm not, um, it's not something I'm, you know,
mentally ill about whatever,
but then we've got to figure out what it is that you have.
And I really don't know. We don't know yet. We don't know. Wow.
But it's been around for so long. I know,
but this is where we need a lot more research about this.
So in terms of what is it that's making these people like this,
and this is really important.
And is there anything they can do to eradicate the text?
You know, this is another thing you'll find interesting. Um,
in Minnesota, prior to the rival, the first Whiteman,
the native Americans burned much of our state all the time,
the Prairie's for much of the territory. And even in Northern Wisconsin,
Northern Minnesota, we had the classic, you know, pine forest, firewood,
whites row. And with that,
it would open up so much of the forest that,
that you'd have a very different kind of, of, of mammals population, deer,
et cetera, et cetera.
And with the suppression of fire what's happened is we've now have,
instead of having these old growth forest, we have all this younger, you know,
non pine or any kind of like the Oak trees of the upper Midwest are all
disappearing because Oak trees need sunlight and fires.
What kept there were very resistant to fire.
And so the old Oak forest and so forth would, would survive cause a fire.
Whereas today with no fire, you know,
the Elms and the Maples and everything else comes in and the buck Thor and all
that kind of stuff and takes over. So,
so what's happening is in our state of Minnesota is we have a really good
example of this as we're losing our moose.
And the big primary reason is brain worm. It's brain room.
It's a type of parasite. That's common and white tail deer,
but causes no problems in moose.
It actually causes a brain infection and it kills them.
And guess why it's happening?
Because the deer range has moved farther and farther north in Minnesota,
try to keep this
[inaudible] has moved farther in Northern Minnesota because of lack of fire
because the forest is changing. So now where there only used to be moose,
we're seeing deer and moose and where that intersection is.
We're starting to see moose develop his brain worm infection cause it's from the
deer. So the tick population has changed too. And it's largely due to the fire,
lack of fire in many places in the Northeast, never used to be like it was,
we had fire all the time that would clear out these areas and it was just a part
of natural everything. So,
so one of the challenges we have with ticks is they're here.
We're not going to change how we live suburbs and trees and all of that.
Controlled burns eliminate.
A lot of them, they do,
because what they do is they just don't eliminate the ticks.
But what they do is they eliminate, for example,
the Whitefield mice or all these different species that are important to the
ticks. And then they bring in different species that will will be there. So,
I mean, this is a big debate in Minnesota right now. I mean, we're,
we're losing all these moves to brainwork. Ironically,
the moose for population is expanding dramatically. I'll Royal.
Why? Because there's no deer out there.
And so they're not getting brain worm out there. So people have said, you know,
we're going to lose our moose. Well, it's the deer. So,
so fire actually has helped the most in areas in Northern Minnesota where
there's been a lot of fire,
the moose population is growing because the deer are not there because exactly
those mammals, those rodents and so forth are very different in burnt-out areas.
And they are in fi in non burnt-out areas.
They do control burns. In some states, I got,
I had a friend who was hunting in Washington state a couple of years ago.
And he said,
it was really weird because there's these massive fires in the distance that
were actually being controlled. They do it on purpose.
Yeah. Which is a lot better than having the out of control fires,
where you have so much fuel. And, you know,
if you haven't had a poorest fire in 85, a hundred years in an area,
the fuel in there is huge. And so actually they do that in Northern Minnesota,
too. They're doing controlled burns in the paries.
Of course we do a controlled burns all the time. So.
But the problem with the east coast is you're dealing with a lot of these sorta
almost residential areas that have yeah.
All these ticks. Yeah. You can't. Yeah, there, you can't there.
We have to find ways that that's,
that's where we really have to have vaccines and treatments for these diseases
rock, you get rid of the ticks. So what we have to do is figure out a, I mean,
wouldn't it be incredible.
We have a cocktail vaccine for male Babesia for Lyme disease,
and that's what we need.
Is there any kind of an animal that eats ticks.
Birds? Yeah. Birds will eat them, but not enough. Not enough. No, no. They're,
they're doing very well. Thank you. Ticks do very well.
And that's another issue, uh, you know, for some of the larger mammals is,
you know, tick predation can get so heavy, particularly in, in,
in certain times of the year that that really literally,
it takes a lot of blood out of these large animals, even though they're so big.
I went down a rabbit hole the other day online,
and I saw this one deer that was covered in these Frisbee size patches of
texts. That's exactly right.
Swollen all and they're full of blood. Oh. So, and it happens day after day.
So it is a hit on them. It's a real hidden.
To pull up a picture of that, just to freak people out of watching online.
Just they need to see this. Yeah. It may be amaze.
It's one of those things that when you talk about ticks and you talk about Lyme
disease, most people, their eyes glaze over, they don't even care.
It's not affecting me until someone in your family has it. Yep. Um,
does a guy that I know who was a former UFC fighter, Marcus Davis, who he put,
he had his wife got Lyme disease and he spent hundreds of thousands of dollars
trying to,
trying to help burn and do something about and treatments and all these
different things for it. Yeah.
It's a, it's a real challenge. It's a challenge. And this is another area.
Again, you know,
when you think of the amount of money we lose in just last time,
let alone pain and suffering what an investment to make in this. I mean, this,
this is the kind of thing,
and this is where infectious disease is really needed to run the science.
I mean.
We pulled up a chart of the United States where they showed the areas that are
affected by these ticks. And what,
what percentage of ticks carry Lyme disease they've tested and some places in
the Northeast it's in the 60%.
Exactly. Yeah, it is. It's huge. And it's growing and it's growing. I mean,
when you and understand how wildlife has changed, I mean, look at,
to think that we have all these wild coyote populations in New York city now.
Yes. I mean, it's amazing how many animals, the city and the country,
what the rats aren't doing, the coyotes are taken off and it's, it's,
it's a challenge. I mean, these are infectious disease issues too.
They're they're.
Very real. Yeah. They have coyotes in central park. They do.
Yeah, absolutely.
They're put in the Bronx. They have them in, I mean, it's weird.
It's weird to see, because this is something that just didn't exist before.
Look at it. There's that's that's okay. Yeah.
That's okay. That's not, that's not the best I've seen, but it's gross enough.
It gives you a good sense of it though.
Yeah. Uh, Dan Flores,
who has been a guest on the podcast before has a great book called coyote
America.
That sort of details how this king to be and how these coyotes have a, oh,
look at that. All over that.
Poor deer. Look at the eye and the phone.
Yeah. Yeah. They're disgusting.
But the coyotes about how,
when they got rid of the wolves and, uh,
they tried to do the same to the coyote.
They just actually expanded their territory. They're sneaky.
Very clever little animals.
Adaption. Yeah. Just like microbes adaption. Yeah.